JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the "NewsHour"
tonight:
We're on the ground in New
Hampshire, where
presidential candidates in both
parties face
a crucial test next week.
GWEN IFILL: Also ahead this
Thursday, we sit
down with the president of
Colombia, Juan
Manuel Santos, to discuss a
possible peace
deal with the FARC rebels, and
the new Zika
threat.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS, Colombian
President: I
am very concerned, because this
is, for us,
something new. It is new for the
world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And all in, the
real odds of
playing fantasy sports.
JAY CASPIAN KANG, The New York
Times: Some
of them are guys who worked on
Wall Street
and were investment analysts,
and a lot of
them, I think, are just guys who
are of sort
of good at sports statistics and
that they
found a way to turn this into a
living.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more on
tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: It's been another
day of hard
campaigning, and hard words, in
New Hampshire,
where primary day is just five
days off. As
Democrats prepared to debate
tonight, the
top Republican contenders took
new shots at
each other.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: Cruz fired off
a broadside.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
Donald Trump is very rattled
right now. You
know, he said, how stupid could
the people
of Iowa be? I assume the next
question he's
going to ask is, how stupid can
the people
of New Hampshire be?
LISA DESJARDINS: While, in
Exeter, Trump suggested
again that Cruz's win in Iowa
was tainted.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
We will find out what happens.
That was a
very strange thing that happened
in Iowa.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the
meantime, the candidates
that some call establishment
kept their fire
trained on one another. Marco
Rubio made his
own appearance in Portsmouth.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
I am the conservative that can
win. And if
we win, we can turn this country
around.
LISA DESJARDINS: But Chris
Christie dismissed
that claim, telling ABC News
that, in fact,
the Florida senator is the most
coddled candidate
in the race.
GOV. CHRIS CHRISTIE (R-NJ),
Presidential Candidate:
The heat that he will get from
Hillary Clinton,
if he's ever the nominee, will
be much greater
than anything any of us could
throw at him.
LISA DESJARDINS: For
Democrats...
ANDERSON COOPER, CNN: Are you
really progressive?
LISA DESJARDINS: ... Hillary
Clinton herself
was feeling the heat last night
at CNN's town
hall in Derry, New Hampshire. At
issue, still,
who's the true progressive?
Bernie Sanders, ahead in New
Hampshire polls,
appeared separately. He argued
that Clinton's
ties to Wall Street are a
disqualifier.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS (VT-I),
Presidential Candidate:
I do not know any progressive
who has a super
PAC and takes $15 million from
Wall Street.
That's just not progressive.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton was
pressed, in particular,
for speaking fees she'd
previously collected
from Goldman Sachs.
ANDERSON COOPER: Did you have to
be paid $675,000?
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, I don't know. That's what
they offered.
LISA DESJARDINS: But she
insisted the money
wouldn't sway her policy about
banks.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Name
anything they
have influenced me on. Just name
one thing.
I'm out here every day saying
I'm going to
shut them down, I'm going after
them, I'm
going to jail them if they
should be jailed,
I'm going to break them up. I
mean, they're
not giving me very much money
now. I can tell
you that much.
(LAUGHTER)
LISA DESJARDINS: In between the
barbs, there
were also glimpses of how the
candidates view
the world at their core.
SEN. BERNIE SANDERS: And I worry
very much
about a society where some
people spiritually
say, it doesn't matter to me, I
got it, I
don't care about other people.
So my spirituality is that we
are all in this
together and that when children
go hungry,
when veterans sleep out on the
street, it
impacts me.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON: Be
grateful for being
a human being, being part of the
universe.
Be grateful for your
limitations. Know that
you have to reach out to have
more people
be with you, to support you, to
advise you.
Listen to your critics. Answer
the questions.
But, at the end, be grateful.
LISA DESJARDINS: Clinton and
Sanders face
each other directly tonight in a
debate just
added to the calendar hosted by
MSNBC in Manchester.
GWEN IFILL: And now we turn to
our political
director, Lisa Desjardins, in
Manchester.
Lisa, you have been on the
ground there. You
have been going to events,
talking to voters.
What are you hearing? What do
they want to
hear?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think this is
the moment
where New Hampshire is fully
turning its attention
to this race.
Gwen, I think that this is not a
time to look
at polls coming out of New
Hampshire, because
from my talks with voters today,
even those
who have told pollsters that
they made up
their mind told me today that
they're still
squishy, that they're still
looking at all
the candidates.
I think what it feels like today
in New Hampshire,
Gwen, is a moment of great and
kind of profound
evaluation. Voters here feel
like it is a
very important contest on both
sides, and
there are some voters I talked
to today who
said they're not even sure which
party they're
going to vote with.
GWEN IFILL: So at these events
that you go
to visit, whether ladies who
lunch, meeting
with surrogates, or whether it's
Donald Trump
at a police station, or
political tourists
from all over the country, what
is it that
people are feeling, are looking
for, are actually
searching around for?
LISA DESJARDINS: It's a good
question, because
I'm not sure the campaigns
coming out of Iowa
have fully embraced what voters
here in New
Hampshire are looking for.
In Iowa, it seemed clear there
were a lot
of supporters looking for their
candidates.
They wanted exposure, and they
wanted those
big, large speeches. Here in New
Hampshire,
the voters are telling me again
and again
they want that personal contact.
They demand
it. It's nothing to them to see
a candidate
four or five times.
I know our viewers have heard
that before,
but I think it's especially
worth putting
a spike in right now. When Ted
Cruz, Donald
Trump, and Marco Rubio all seem
to be in a
real horse race, they have a
pool of voters
that, just from talking to them
on the ground,
Gwen, aren't sure which one to
go with.
Those Republican voters, Gwen,
that I talked
to today, they want a strong,
tough leader,
but they also want one who they
think will
represent this country with
dignity. They
see three candidates who all
represent very
different combinations of those
things they
want. And I have not heard many
voters today
who said they are 100 percent
sure about which
one of those three are on top.
And on top of those three, there
are other
Republicans that are very much
in the game
here.
GWEN IFILL: I want to get to
them. I want
to talk about the dignity piece.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: We have seen a lot
of squabbling
going back at the top of both
sides.
LISA DESJARDINS: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: But does that allow
someone like
Marco Rubio, who seems seemed to
have at least
come out of Iowa looking better
than expected,
he said, to walk through the
middle of all
of that?
LISA DESJARDINS: That certainly
is the Rubio
campaign's hope, but to be
honest, Gwen, as
much as we hear so much about
Marco Rubio,
I'm not sure he's surging quite
yet in New
Hampshire.
What I felt from voters today is
that those
who had not really given him a
hard look before
now are looking at him closely.
So I think
over this weekend, maybe that
surge will start
to happen, the doors open for
him. I think
you're right that there is a
question of dignity.
Donald Trump has used more
colorful language
than before today and in the
past couple of
days. And I heard more than one
voter who
said that they liked Trump,
saying that they
don't like the way he's
questioning the results
in Iowa. They say he needs to
move on, and
it's making them look at him in
a little bit
of a different way.
GWEN IFILL: Well, tonight,
another Democratic
debate. Last night, we had a
forum, tonight,
both of them are on stage. What
are we expecting?
LISA DESJARDINS: Right. This is
a huge moment
for both Hillary Clinton and
Bernie Sanders.
Of course, Bernie Sanders way
out in front
in the polls, but when you talk
to voters
here, there are a lot of
question marks about
not just whether his agenda is
feasible, but
is it doable?
Not just could anyone in some
time in the
future create this political
revolution, but
in the next eight years, when
voters feel
they need economic help, could
Bernie Sanders
actually bring some of that
economic help?
So, that's the question he has
to answer in
this debate.
For Hillary Clinton, it's almost
the opposite.
Her strength is that voters feel
that she
can get things done. We have
seen her talk
about that, but there is a lot
of mistrust
of her. We have talked about
that before.
And what's interesting, Gwen, is
it's from
voters who feel they know her
very well. She
and Bill Clinton have campaigned
here for
many cycles. So she has to sort
of present
a new side to a face that is
very well known
here. That is not always easy to
do.
GWEN IFILL: From the ground in
Manchester,
New Hampshire, for us tonight,
Lisa Desjardins,
thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other news, the
former head of a drug company,
Martin Shkreli,
took the Fifth today on why he
raised the
price of a critical drug by 5000
percent.
The one-time boss of Turing
Pharmaceuticals
appeared at a congressional
hearing, but he
repeatedly refused to testify.
MARTIN SHKRELI, Former CEO,
Turing Pharmaceuticals:
On the advice of counsel, I
invoke my Fifth
Amendment, privilege against
self-incrimination,
and respectfully decline to
answer your question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lawmakers on both
sides blasted
Turing's decision to raise the
price of medicine
for a deadly parasitic
infection.
But Shkreli appeared to make
light of it all,
and Maryland Democrat Elijah
Cummings took
him to task.
REP. ELIJAH CUMMINGS (D),
Maryland: The way
I see it, you can go down in
history as the
poster boy for greedy drug
company executives,
or you can change the system.
Yes, you. You
detailed the knowledge about
drug companies
and the system we have today.
And I truly
believe -- are you listening?
MARTIN SHKRELI: Yes.
REP. ELIJAH CUMMINGS: Thank you.
I truly believe you could become
a force of
tremendous good.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The appeal,
though, may have
fallen on deaf ears. After he
left the hearing,
Shkreli's official Twitter
account flashed
a message that read: "Hard to
accept that
these imbeciles represent the
people of our
country."
GWEN IFILL: The latest numbers
are in, and
12.7 million people signed up
for private
health insurance this year under
the Affordable
Care Act. That means enrollment
is in line
with the administration's
projections. This
was the third sign-up season
under the president's
health care law.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the Zika virus
outbreak,
Brazilian authorities say they
have identified
two cases transmitted through
blood transfusions.
The virus is most commonly
spread through
mosquito bites, and is being
linked to birth
defects. The outbreak has now
spread across
much of Latin America.
GWEN IFILL: In Greece, public
transit and
services ground to a halt in
much of the country
today, as thousands of people
walked off the
job in a general strike.
Farmers, doctors
and others joined public workers
to protest
pension reforms tied to Greece's
third international
bailout.
MAN: This cannot go on. They
must withdraw
this monstrous bill right now.
This reform
plan is against the workers and
the people.
We will continue fighting until
victory.
GWEN IFILL: Demonstrations were
largely peaceful,
but some anarchist protesters
and police exchanged
firebombs and tear gas in
clashes outside
the parliament building in
Athens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Back in this
country, word
today Hillary Clinton wasn't the
only secretary
of state to receive classified
information
in personal e-mails. The
department's inspector
general has found sensitive data
in e-mails
sent to former Secretaries Colin
Powell and
Condoleezza Rice or their
staffs. Clinton's
campaign says State has gone --
quote -- "overboard"
on classification.
GWEN IFILL: There's another big
air bag recall.
Continental Automotive Systems
says up to
five million vehicles worldwide
are affected.
Something less than two million
are in the
U.S. Moisture can damage the air
bags so they
don't deploy in a crash. And
Honda has recalled
another 2.2 million vehicles in
North America.
They have Takata air bags that
can fire metal
shards.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wall Street
managed modest
gains today. The Dow Jones
industrial average
was up nearly 80 points to close
at 16416.
The Nasdaq rose five, and the
S&P 500 added
three.
GWEN IFILL: And the founder and
leader of
Earth, Wind and Fire, Maurice
White, has died.
The band formed in the late
1960s, and sold
more than 90 million albums,
with hits that
included "September," "Shining
Star" and "Boogie
Wonderland." They joined the
Rock and Roll
Hall of Fame in 2000. Maurice
White was 74
years old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Colombia's
president on his country's
prospects for peace
after 50 years of conflict;
billions of dollars
pledged to Syria as its peace
talks break
down; the economic booms and
busts of fantasy
sports; and much more.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Late this
afternoon, the White
House announced a proposed $450
million aid
package for the nation of
Colombia. The two
countries also agreed to
cooperate to combat
the Zika virus, now present
throughout most
of South America.
The bulk of the proposed funding
would go
to reinforce a long-running aid
public called
Plan Colombia with what
President Obama dubbed
Peace Colombia to cement a peace
deal spearheaded
by the Colombian president.
Juan Manuel Santos came to the
White House
this afternoon at a critical
moment in his
nation's history: the potential
end to Latin
America's longest-running war.
There have
been more than 50 years of
fighting between
the Colombian government and the
revolutionary
armed forces of Colombia, the
leftist group
known by its Spanish acronym,
FARC.
It's led to the deaths of more
than 220,000
people, millions more displaced.
But after
three failed attempts at peace
accords, and
four years of talks, a deal may
be within
sight. So far, negotiations
hosted in Cuba
have yielded agreements on land
reform, illegal
drug trafficking, prisoner
releases, and efforts
to find missing persons.
Ivan Marquez is lead negotiator
for the FARC.
IVAN MARQUEZ, Lead Negotiator,
FARC (through
translator): This peace process
has progressed
like no other in Colombia. It
shouldn't have
the armed confrontation as a
backdrop, nor
the sad death of young uniformed
soldiers,
policemen and guerrillas. Only
in an atmosphere
of trust and harmony can we
agree on what
is needed to reach the final
agreement.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If that happens,
the government
will need to expand health and
education services
into rebel-controlled areas.
It's a job made
more challenging by the
emergence of the Zika
virus and its link to birth
defects. More
than 20,000 cases have been
confirmed in Colombia,
among them some 2,100 pregnant
women.
As a result, Colombian President
Santos sought
major new assistance from
President Obama
today.
BARACK OBAMA, President of the
United States:
Just as the United States has
been Colombia's
partner in a time of war, I
indicated to President
Santos, we will be your partner
in waging
peace.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Indeed, over the
past 15 years,
the U.S. has provided almost $10
billion in
anti-narcotics and
counterinsurgency aid through
a program called Plan Colombia.
And at the
Cuban talks yesterday, a FARC
leader urged
that the United States
contribute to a lasting
peace.
PASTOR ALAPE, Negotiator, FARC:
A country
that was engaged in the conflict
in Colombia
should also be engaged in
building a new era,
with resources for peace, for
reconciliation
and for the prosperity of all
those who suffered,
with an emphasis on the victims.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, for both
sides in Colombia,
the pieces seem to be falling
into place.
The U.N. Security Council has
approved a mission
to monitor an eventual
agreement, a move that
Santos hailed last week.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS, Colombian
President (through
translator): The decision taken
by the Security
Council means that we are no
longer alone.
We have the hand of the United
Nations, of
the whole world in ending this
war. It's the
best guarantee this will happen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: An overall peace
accord could
be finalized as early as next
month.
Earlier today, I sat down with
President Juan
Manuel Santos of Colombia.
Welcome, President Santos, to
the United States.
You come at what many see as a
time of a turning
point for your country. Is that
how you see
it?
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: Yes. We have
been at war
for 50 years, the only and
longest armed conflict
in the whole of the Western
Hemisphere.
And we're about to sign a peace
agreement
that will end this conflict, so
it is a turning
point for Colombia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How -- Americans
have thought
of Colombia for decades as a
place that is
run by drug cartels, racked with
internal
conflict. It's hard for them to
understand
how now there may finally be
peace with these
leftist rebels. How do you
explain that?
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: Well,
there's been a substantial
change in Colombia, thanks in
many ways to
the help we have received from
the United
States.
The Plan Colombia, which was
launched in the
year 2000, was launched was
Colombia was on
the verge of being declared a
failed state.
And, as you say, we were a
country that was
always related to drug
trafficking, violence,
homicides, kidnappings.
But, today, the country is
fundamentally different.
Today, we are leaders in
economic growth,
leaders in the reduction of
poverty, leaders
in the region in the creation of
employment.
Our democracy is working. Our
security has
improved tremendously.
And we are about to sign a peace
agreement
that will open up opportunities
that Colombia
had never imagined, because most
of Colombians
have lived during all their
lives in a country
at war.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But the deal is
not done yet.
There are still obstacles that
have to be
overcome. And how do you
reintegrate these
fighters who have spent years
and years thinking
of themselves as opposing the
government?
How do you reintegrate them into
normal society?
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: We have
experience, because
we have reintegrated more than
50,000 combatants,
the former paramilitaries and
members of the
guerrillas. We have demobilized
them and reintegrated
into society.
There is a process, even a
psychological process.
Many times, they have to go back
to school,
kids that only know how to
shoot. They were
born in the guerrilla camps. And
these have
to be retrained and reeducated.
And there's
a process. It's cumbersome. It's
difficult,
but it's necessary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're also
asking that this
group, FARC, this -- these rebel
fighters,
be removed from the U.S. list of
terror groups.
How do you justify giving a pass
to people
who are responsible for
countless deaths,
what is it, several hundred
thousands deaths
in your country, not to mention
their role
in drug trafficking, cocaine
production? How
do they deserve forgiveness?
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: First of
all, we're not
going to forgive them. The most
responsible
will be subject to transitional
justice. They
will be investigated. They will
be judged.
They will be condemned, and they
will be sanctioned.
This process is a process with
no impunity.
And we have been taking a lot of
care that
this is the case. Now, we're
trying to end
a war, a war that has cost more
than 250,000
people dead, more than seven
million people
displaced. And we have to make
the transition
to peace.
So you have to strike a balance.
And that's
what I think we have found, a
correct balance.
A peace agreement is never
perfect. Always,
you have people from one side or
the other
criticizing it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But I know you
know, Mr. President,
that you have people in
Colombia, people here
in Washington who are saying
they are troubled
by the idea that not only will
they not face
serious retribution, but they --
this actually
will strengthen them, and that
they could
come back to commit terror again
in the future.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: No, because,
if they do
that, they will be -- they will
lose all the
benefits. They will go to prison
through ordinary
justice, 50, 60 years in prison.
They know
that.
And that's why I am sure they
will take very
good care of not continuing
their criminal
activities. But what we want is
to finish
the war. We are sitting down
with them from
a position of strength. Ten or
15 years ago,
this would have been impossible.
But I think
my country deserves to have
peace after 50
years of war.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The United States
has already
given Colombia, what, $10
billion over a number
of years, so-called Plan
Colombia, you mentioned.
You're asking for more money
from the U.S.
This is at a time when, yes,
there may be
the peace deal, but there's
still a serious
problem in your country with
cocaine production,
drug trafficking, other issues.
What is the
rationale that the U.S. should
continue to
give money to Colombia?
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: Well, Plan
Colombia is
probably the most successful
bipartisan foreign
policy initiative that the U.S.
has launched
in the recent past, in the past
decades. It's
very successful.
We were a country that was
destroyed, the
worst recession ever, on the
verge of being
declared a failed state. Today,
we are a flourishing
democracy. We have a strong
economy. We have
progressed tremendously. So,
those are the
results of Plan Colombia.
Now, Plan Colombia allowed us to
and is allowing
us to finish the conflict. And I
think this
is the cherry on the cake of
this policy.
Now we have to -- together --
and Colombia
is the most important, and I
call it strategic
partner, that the U.S. has south
of Rio Grande.
So, now the U.S. wants to help
us in the construction
of peace. You end the conflict,
and you start
constructing peace. And that's
why the cooperation
of both countries, because don't
forget 95
percent of Plan Colombia was
financed by our
own resources.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is there anything
hopeful,
quickly, to be said, Mr.
President, about
drug, cocaine production,
exportation, the
drug, frankly, crisis that still
exists in
Colombia, and as it affects the
Americas?
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: Oh. Well, we
have diminished
the number of families that are
dedicated
to the cultivation of the coca
crops by two-thirds.
And we have caught -- we have
interdicted
more cocaine, for example, last
year than
ever before.
We have learned how to dismantle
the big drug
cartels. But if you continue to
demand the
cocaine here in the United
States or in Europe,
you will always have somebody to
supply that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Fair point about
the demand.
Just finally, Mr. President, you
have a new
worry with the Zika virus.
There's something
like 20,000 cases, as we
reported, in your
country, 2,100 women who are
pregnant with
this virus.
How are you managing this? How
concerned are
you?
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: I am very
concerned, because
this is, for us, something new.
It's new for
the world. We know very little
about the Zika
consequences.
We now have some evidence that a
pregnant
woman might give birth to babies
with a very
serious -- a very serious
illness, which is
the microcephaly. We have some
evidence that
this might produce an illness
called Guillain-Barre
in normal persons.
To what extent, how many people
that are infected
by the illness will have these
consequences,
we still don't know. There was a
meeting,
an emergency meeting of all the
health ministers
in Uruguay two days ago. We are
monitoring
the situation very closely.
And this is one of the subjects
that we are
also cooperating with the U.S.
to see if we
can do more research on this
type of illness
to be better prepared for the
future.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We certainly wish
you well
with that, and as we do every
other place
that's dealing with it.
President Juan Manuel Santos, we
thank you
very much.
JUAN MANUEL SANTOS: Thank you
for this opportunity.
GWEN IFILL: Now, from a conflict
that may
soon end to one that rages still
in Syria.
William Brangham has this update
on the five-year
civil war there, and the
international efforts
to stop it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Recriminations
erupted in
full force just one day after
peace talks
stalled in Geneva. Saudi Arabia
and Turkey
blamed heavy new attacks by
Syrian government
forces and Russian airstrikes
for undermining
the diplomatic effort.
The Syrian army confirmed today
it expects
it will soon surround the city
of Aleppo,
Syria's largest city. It's an
advance that
could have far-reaching
consequences.
Faysal Itani is a fellow at the
Atlantic Council
in Washington.
FAYSAL ITANI, Atlantic Council:
You're seeing
a general trend of regime
victories. And Aleppo
would be a sort of crowning
achievement of
this trend, thanks in large part
to Russian
air support. There has not yet
been a complete
encirclement of the city, but
the main supply
line that transfers ammunition,
weapons, other
supplies from Turkey, for
example, to the
rebels who are in Aleppo city
has now been
severed.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: A
British-based monitoring
group reported today that, over
the past week,
Syrian and Russian warplanes
have mounted
one of the most intense bombing
campaigns
in months. They hit more than
500 opposition
targets throughout Syria, paving
the way for
the offensive north of Aleppo.
That brought warnings today of a
new mass
exodus of refugees.
Turkey's prime minister spoke in
London at
a conference on aid for Syrian
refugees.
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister: Sixty
thousand to 70,000 people in the
camps in
North Aleppo are moving towards
Turkey. My
mind is not now in London, but
in our border,
how to relocate these new people
coming from
Syria.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Turkey is
already sheltering
more than 2.5 million Syrians,
making it the
biggest refugee host country in
the world.
The Turkish prime minister
insisted today
that the U.S. take a stronger
stance against
Russian actions in Syria.
In turn, U.S. Secretary of State
John Kasich
said the Russian foreign
minister has now
agreed to at least consider a
cease-fire.
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of
State: We discussed
and he agreed that we need to
discuss how
to implement cease-fire, and
also how to get
access by both parties. The
opposition needs
to allow access for humanitarian
assistance,
and the regime in Syria needs to
allow access.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The depth of
that need was
made clear in this drone video
of the devastation
in the city of Homs after five
years of civil
war. It was shot by the film
company RussiaWorks.
Secretary Kerry said the 70
donor nations
gathered in London cannot turn
away from the
horror.
JOHN KERRY: If people are
reduced to eating
grass and leaves and killing
stray animals
in order to survive on a
day-to-day basis,
that is something that should
tear at the
conscience of all civilized
people, and we
all have a responsibility to
respond to it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The conference
ultimately
pledged some $10 billion over
the next four
years to assist Syria and
countries like Jordan,
Lebanon, and Turkey. That
brought a glimmer
of hope to some refugees housed
at the sprawling
Zaatari refugee camp in Jordan.
AHMED NAFEL, Refugee (through
translator):
God willing, this conference
will help us.
We need help to feed our
children.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Still, there
is little sign
that the conflict will end soon.
Russia today
accused Turkey of planning its
own invasion
into Syria.
MAJ. GEN. IGOR KONASHENKOV,
Russian Ministry
of Defense (through translator):
We have serious
grounds to suspect that Turkey
is preparing
for a military incursion. We
have presented
undeniable evidence to the
international community
proving Turkey opened artillery
fire over
a residential area to the north
of Latakia.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And Saudi
Arabia announced
it's poised to send ground
troops into Syria
to join the fight against the
Islamic State.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Oregon's hidden
canyon; when breath becomes air,
a doctor's
account of his dying days; and
an essayist
honors the fearlessness of black
artists.
But, first, pro football is
getting ready
to wrap up its season with the
Super Bowl
on Sunday. One fan story that
was a big part
of this NFL season was the
furious growth
of daily fantasy sports for many
games like
football.
In its short lifespan, that
industry has gained
57 million players. But now
there's rising
scrutiny of fantasy sports'
legality from
legislators and regulators
across the country.
Our economics correspondent,
Paul Solman,
has the story, part of his
series Making Sense,
which airs every Thursday on the
"NewsHour."
PAUL SOLMAN: It was an ad blitz
to attack
even the most innocent
bystander. Ahead of
the 2015 NFL season, the two
leading daily
fantasy sports companies,
FanDuel and DraftKings,
aired a national ad every 90
seconds. Together,
they outspent the entire beer
industry in
the month leading up to opening
kickoff, $207
million.
Comedian John Oliver made it a
subject of
his weekly HBO show, including
this spoof
commercial.
MAN: I have been using FanDuel
since I saw
all those commercials on TV all
the (EXPLETIVE
DELETED) time.
MAN: Daily fantasy is the best.
I get to play
every day.
WOMAN: You mean you get to
gamble.
MAN: It's not gambling.
WOMAN: Oh, it's definitely
gambling. You have
a massive gambling problem.
MAN: It's actually a
skills-based game that
is going to make us rich one
day.
WOMAN: You're an idiot.
(LAUGHTER)
PAUL SOLMAN: Journalist Jay
Caspian Kang is
no idiot. I met up with him at
Brooklyn's
200 Fifth Avenue Sports Bar,
where the sports
junkie, who played the sites for
17 weeks
and wrote about it for "The New
York Times"
magazine, explained that, for
him, too, the
blitz worked.
And the ads actually convinced
you, you could
make a million dollars?
JAY CASPIAN KANG, The New York
Times: No,
no, no, no, no. I'm not -- I
don't think I
was that much of a mark, but it
also sort
of showed me that this was like
an actual
thing. It wasn't sort of a shady
underground
gambling sort of operation. And
I think the
ads made it seem very
legitimate.
NARRATOR: At DraftKings, we play
for glory.
PAUL SOLMAN: And the ads helped
bring 15 million
more players to the game in
2015. There are
now 57 million players in North
America who
pay anywhere from a quarter to
thousands of
dollars to pick an imaginary
team made up
of real players and compete
online against
anonymous strangers.
That's what I did, with Kang's
help.
I will add LeBron. I want LeBron
James on
my team. I can see already how I
could lose
money easily in this.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: Yes. Yes.
People really
enjoy playing these games. I
mean, I enjoyed
playing them.
PAUL SOLMAN: Because it gives
you a reason
to root in every single game.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: Sure. But this
is sort of
like normal fantasy sports sped
up on steroids.
PAUL SOLMAN: Which is why
FanDuel and DraftKings
have each achieved
billion-dollar valuations.
The potential market is huge.
The companies
have been venture capital
sponges:, $363 million
for FanDuel and $426 million for
DraftKings,
including legal investments from
the National
Basketball Association,
NBC/Comcast, Major
League Baseball and FOX Sports.
Now, when Congress proclaimed
that fantasy
sports were not gambling back in
2006, the
field was dominated by office
pools and friendly
contests, like in the longtime
sitcom "The
League."
ACTOR: He's a fantasy football
genius, OK?
No wife, no job, just pure
football knowledge.
PAUL SOLMAN: But a host of
states are now
challenging daily fantasy
sports. Some have
outright banned it, including
Nevada, which
has a gambling industry of its
own to protect.
DraftKings didn't respond to our
requests
for an interview, and FanDuel
wouldn't speak
to us on camera. But this isn't
gambling,
FanDuel's Matt King told PBS'
"Frontline."
QUESTION: So you don't view what
you do here
at FanDuel as gambling?
MATT KING, FanDuel: No.
QUESTION: That's a word that
isn't used very
much around here, I take it.
MATT KING: No.
PAUL SOLMAN: Jason Robins, CEO
of DraftKings,
says it's skill.
JASON ROBINS, CEO, DraftKings: I
just think,
under the current law right now,
it's very
obvious that this fits within
skill gaming.
PAUL SOLMAN: Hey, says Jay
Caspian Kang, of
course, it's gambling, but the
industry's
defense, the role of skill, is
legit. Only
problem is that, besides
addictiveness, fantasy
sports skill is why it's a
loser's game.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: It takes a lot
of research,
it takes a lot of study, it
takes a lot of
understanding breaking news
things. So, if
you hear it from a beat
reporter, let's say,
for the New England Patriots
that Julian Edelman,
one of the wide receivers, is
injured, you
have to know instinctively what
that means
for the other wide receivers in
terms of how
many times Tom Brady, the
quarterback, is
going to throw to them.
PAUL SOLMAN: And who does this
kind of work?
Math jocks, several dozen of
whom Kang met
with for his story.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: Some of them
are guys who
worked on Wall Street and were
investment
analysts, and a lot of them, I
think, are
just guys who are of sort of
good at sports
statistics and that they found a
way to turn
this into a living.
PAUL SOLMAN: Such researchers
are essentially
gambling pros, much like
professional stock
investors, using high-frequency
trading software
called scripting that analyzes
vast amounts
of data instantly, creates teams
automatically,
and can thus play multiple
entries.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: Those $2
competitions and
$5 competitions, $10, $20
competitions are
blanketed with thousands of
entries from one
person, or two people who are
very, very -- who
have put in a lot of time and
effort into
building these lineups, who use
software that
you don't even know exists to
optimize those
lineups.
And their goal is to just take
your $2. And
if there's 1,000 of you, then
they have got
$2,000.
PAUL SOLMAN: When it came time
to enter my
$5 basketball lineup, I sifted
through hundreds
of players and their stats,
defaulted mostly
to my home team Boston Celtics.
DraftKings says it's banned
scripting and
limited entries, but pros
already seemed to
be there six hours before
tipoff.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: This guy is
one of the most
famous users, Youdacao.
PAUL SOLMAN: Youdacao. He's got
100 entries.
(CROSSTALK)
JAY CASPIAN KANG: ... entries in
there, right.
Schmeckl (ph) is another
relatively famous
player. He has 100 entries.
PAUL SOLMAN: One hundred
entries, yes, 100
entries at $5.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: At five bucks.
Again, this
is for $5, right?
PAUL SOLMAN: And who knows how
many other
names Youdacao or Schmeckl may
be using?
Small wonder a report from the
consulting
firm McKinsey found that, for
Major League
Baseball, 91 percent of profits
were won by
just 1.3 percent of players.
But, hey, I just needed to
finish in the top
7,000 to double my five bucks.
The clock was
ticking. I placed my bet, as a
journalist.
So, as things stand now, if I
wanted to play,
you would discourage me from
doing it?
JAY CASPIAN KANG: Not morally.
PAUL SOLMAN: No, not morally.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: No, but...
PAUL SOLMAN: Prudently, in terms
of prudence.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: Yes. If you
just want to
spend $200 or $50 and have fun,
you know,
then I think it's fine.
But if you feel like you want to
enter a fair
betting economy, and you want to
have as good
a shot as they are telling you
that you have,
then I would say that this is a
very bad bet.
PAUL SOLMAN: Or, as New York
Attorney General
Eric Schneiderman put it: "Daily
fantasy sports
rely on a steady stream of
minnows to feed
the sharks."
So, with states stacking up
against them and
the minnows increasingly aware
of the bigger
fish, Kang says online poker's
fate should
give fair warning to fantasy
sports.
JAY CASPIAN KANG: All that was
left were great
players with a lot of money
playing against
one another and taking each
other's bankrolls
and passing them back and forth.
Daily fantasy sports, I think,
is at a risk
of having that happen within
like a season
or so.
PAUL SOLMAN: And thus a recent
pledge from
FanDuel may be a bid for
self-preservation
-- quote -- "We do believe that
new commonsense
regulations to protect consumers
are needed."
So, what else? Well, I'm sure
you're dying
to know whether my NBA lineup
made the top
7,000. Turns out I finished
15,550th.
For the "PBS NewsHour" in
Brooklyn, this is
so-called economics
correspondent Paul Solman,
with once-high hopes and $25,
now down to
$20.
GWEN IFILL: There are few places
left that
haven't been explored. But a
team in Oregon
has documented a natural wonder
for the first
time that's just about 60 miles
from Portland.
It's a spectacular half-mile
gorge and narrow
canyon in the Cascade Range.
It was first spotted in 2010 by
a Forest Service
employee. This past summer, an
expedition
team spent three days navigating
through it,
including nine major waterfalls
and a grotto
that ended at a slot canyon.
Oregon Public Broadcasting
chronicled that
effort in a new documentary.
Here's an excerpt about trying
to reach the
Valhalla Canyon.
MAN: Oh, man.
BEN CANALES, Photographer: Being
in Valhalla,
it feels like you have gone into
the throat
of something, through the
stomach and you're
in it. You know, for myself, as
I would say
much more a normal person and
not a hard-core
adventurer, there's kind of just
a low level
of panic at the back of the
mind.
It's like, this is not normal.
What's going
to happen here? What's going to
happen there?
MAN: Yes! It's awesome!
BEN CANALES: And so there's kind
of always
a little fight to keep that
quelled down.
And then there's just this
thrilling excitement
at the rugged beauty of it. All
the fears
just disappeared, and it was
like, this is
awesome. You know, the worry was
gone, and
it was just pure adventure.
MAN: As we're moving down
through, all of
a sudden, it just opens up into
this remarkable,
beautiful amphitheater, just,
like, huge,
towering walls on either side of
you. There's
just big, mossy, pour-overs,
water spilling
and trickling in all these
places. And there's
ferns and moss and green. And
it's just a
strikingly beautiful place. We
named that
Cathedral Garden.
BEN CANALES: Oh, my God, walking
into that
space was jaw-dropping. I have
not been in
a place like that in Oregon
before. And it
just had that open-air mystical,
like, giant
feeling.
And it kind of took on a
spiritual moment
in there. Like, no one wanted to
talk loud
in the beginning. You know,
like, we were
just so impressed by it.
MAN: Valhalla!
NARRATOR: All they had to do now
was get through
one more night.
MAN: The walls are so steep over
the top of
us, and there is rockfall in
this area. And,
again, there's no other place to
camp.
BEN CANALES: And it's, like,
we're in this.
This precarious situation is the
safest alternative.
And whatever happens, it's going
to happen.
It makes me feel wonderfully
small in this
place. It's like this comforting
reprioritization
of where we fit in nature and
the food chain
of things.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What makes a life
worth living?
What gives it meaning? And how
does that change
when the time one has left
collapses? These
are some of the profound
questions taken up
in a new memoir by a doctor who
suddenly faced
his own mortality.
Jeffrey Brown has our newest
addition to the
"NewsHour" Bookshelf.
JEFFREY BROWN: As a
neurosurgeon, Paul Kalanithi
was used to dealing with
life-and-death issues.
He was, by his own account, a
driven man who
studied literature and
philosophy before turning
to medicine, earning five
degrees along the
way.
He was near completion of a
rigorous residency
at Stanford when, at age 36, he
got a diagnosis
of lung cancer.
PAUL KALANITHI, Author, "When
Breath Becomes
Air": Five years down the line,
I don't know
what I will be doing. I may be
dead. I may
not be.
JEFFREY BROWN: He would live
just 22 months
more, and in that time have a
child with his
wife, Lucy, and write an
indelible memoir,
"When Breath Becomes Air."
DR. LUCY KALANITHI, Widow of
Paul Kalanithi:
He had thought maybe he would
have a long
career as a neurosurgeon or a
scientist and
then maybe a writer.
JEFFREY BROWN: He had planned on
all this,
right?
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: That's
right. He said:
"I think I may be years into my
retirement
now, at age 36. And so what do I
want to do?"
And the answer was write.
JEFFREY BROWN: Lucy Kalanithi is
also a doctor.
The two met at Yale Medical
School and were
married nine years before Paul's
death in
2015.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: He was sort
of a perpetual
learner and a seeker and
somebody who was
very interested in kind of
understanding what
it is to be human and what makes
-- what sort
of makes life meaningful. And he
approached
that...
JEFFREY BROWN: From the
beginning, right?
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: That's
right, yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: He went to
grad school
in English literature, and sort
of made his
way into neuroscience because he
wanted a
real understanding of kind of
consciousness
and what makes us human. So he
kind of came
at that from different angles.
JEFFREY BROWN: One of the themes
that comes
through clearly in his life and
his book is
identity, right, is sort what
makes us, us.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: Yes.
You know, when you have a brain
disorder or
you're having surgery on your
brain, you are
thinking about questions like,
will this affect
my language, will this affect my
personality,
not just, how does this illness
affect my
body in other ways?
So it's kind of a very intense
place for decision-making
about identity. And he was very
interested
in that.
JEFFREY BROWN: And then, of
course, it happens
to him. And he starts -- as he's
dying, he's
thinking about, if you're dying,
rather than
living, in a sense, then are you
still you?
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: In the
moment of diagnoses,
he sort of saw his life
trajectory and his
self kind of come tumbling down.
He wasn't
going to be a neurosurgeon for
years and years.
And we thought initially that he
actually
had less time to live. We
thought he might
have months or less than a year.
And then
he started a therapy that
allowed him a lot
more kind of functionality than
he expected
and a longer prognosis
potentially. And so
then it was this big question
of, I don't
know how much time I have left
and how do
I spend that time? Who am I?
JEFFREY BROWN: Paul spoke of
this in a video
released by his publisher.
PAUL KALANITHI: It's a careful
load to balance.
If you don't think about the bad
case, that
ending is going to be very rough
on you and
your family.
But if you don't think about the
good case,
you're going to miss an
opportunity to really
make the most out of your life
and time.
JEFFREY BROWN: You know, one of
the things
that struck me also here is, he
learns a lot
about doctoring, right, that he
had never
seen as a doctor.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: Yes, yes,
yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: He writes, for
example, at
one point, "Realizing how little
doctors understand
the hells through for which we
put patients."
He was really getting to see
things from a
different side.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: He had been
in medicine
for a decade as a student and
then a resident,
but all these tiny little
experiences -- like,
as an example, when you get an
I.V. and they
start infusing normal saline
into your vein,
you can taste the salt.
And he said: "I have been a
doctor for a decade,
and I never knew you could taste
the salt."
And it's all these tiny details
that sort
of come to the fore. And that's
not even to
mention the physical and
emotional suffering
that comes with being sick and
the way it
rocks you and rocks your family.
So, yes,
we really kind of felt that.
JEFFREY BROWN: He could look at
it intellectually,
but he also then had to look at
it very realistically.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: Yes.
When we got the news of this
terrible chest
X-ray that looked really kind of
dense with
tumors, and kind of helped
explain why he
had been having weight loss and
back pain
and real kind of health troubles
for a few
months, both of us knew that the
next day
we were going to the hospital.
He would have
a C.T. scan and it would likely
show metastatic
cancer.
Being doctors, we could see that
path. And
when we packed for the hospital,
I was packing
socks and pillows and phone
chargers, and
he just packed three books. He
packed "Mere
Christianity" by C.S. Lewis,
Heidegger's "Being
and Time," and Solzhenitsyn's
"Cancer Ward."
And I think it was that
transition right away
where he said: "This is becoming
so personal
that I need my books. Like, I
need to understand
this through literature."
When he became ill, he kind of
translated
the experience back into writing
and words
to make sense of it. And this
book is part
of that.
JEFFREY BROWN: And what about
for you? What
did you feel when you read it?
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: So, I read
it in real
time, as he was writing it.
I would read it daily or weekly.
And it was
kind of a great communication
tool for us,
actually.
JEFFREY BROWN: Oh, really?
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: Because he
would talk
about -- oh, yes.
Seeing him write the book was
really amazing,
because even though his body was
sort of in
this state of physical collapse,
his mind
was so engaged, still, in this
process.
And kind of the reviews of the
book that I
like the best capture that
somewhat. There's
an author named Gavin Francis
who wrote a
blurb for the book. And he wrote
something
like, "This is a tremendous
book, crackling
with life."
And that idea, like, it brings
tears to my
eyes to think of crackling with
life, because,
if you had seen Paul, you know,
he's wrapped
up in a blanket, he's sitting in
this armchair.
He looks frail and wan, you
know? He looks
ill.
JEFFREY BROWN: As he's writing?
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: But he's
crackling with
life. And that was just really
true. And the
book was a big part of that.
JEFFREY BROWN: The two of you
made a very
important, major decision in the
midst of
this, which was to have a child.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: That's
right.
JEFFREY BROWN: Was that a tough
decision?
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: We had
always wanted to
have children together. We
hadn't done it
by the end of his residency.
That was around
the time we had pictured we
always would.
And right at that time was when
he was diagnosed
with terminal cancer, terminal
lung cancer.
And it was a series of really
intense conversations
to figure out if we wanted to do
that and
could we handle that, and both
of us had the
instinct to do it.
But we needed to think very hard
about what
it would mean. You know, we
talked really
frankly about his prognosis and
what was happening.
And I said that, "Don't you
think that saying
goodbye to a child would make
your death even
more painful?"
And he said, "Well, wouldn't it
be great if
it did?"
PAUL KALANITHI: Since Cady's
birth, my time
with her has had a very peculiar
and free
nature. In all probability, I
won't live long
enough for her to remember me,
and so the
time is -- just is what it is.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: That was
kind of this
amazing thing, where it's like
life isn't
just about avoiding suffering.
It's about
finding meaning. And having a
child was part
of that for us.
JEFFREY BROWN: The very powerful
book is "When
Breath Becomes Air" by Paul
Kalanithi.
Lucy Kalanithi, thank you so
much.
DR. LUCY KALANITHI: My pleasure.
I wish it
were Paul here. Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: Finally, the latest
installment
of Brief But Spectacular, our
series where
we ask interesting people to
describe their
passions.
Tonight, we hear from writer
Rachel Kaadzi
Ghansah, a "New York Times"
magazine contributor
and author of the forthcoming
book "The Explainers
and the Explorers." Her essays
on uncompromising
artists of color have earned
critical acclaim.
Here, she speaks about
fearlessness and black
art.
RACHEL KAADZI GHANSAH, Author,
"The Explainers
and the Explorers": I like
writing about people
who look like me and the people
I know who
don't have good pieces written
about them,
because we deserve it.
I have written about Jimi
Hendrix, Electric
Lady Studios, Toni Morrison,
Kendrick Lamar,
the Watts riots, Trayvon Martin,
Rachel Jeantel,
Dave Chappelle.
We don't always hear about the
people who
we know as legends the ways that
they were
very true to themselves. I'm
more interested
in the moments when they were
uncompromising
and they were fearless, because
what I hope
is that that fearlessness tells
us a little
bit about how we can be
fearless.
What was interesting to me about
Dave Chappelle
is, here is a moment where
typically walking
away from Comedy Central,
walking away from
your career would be a bad
decision, and anyone
would tell you, don't do that.
The common
understanding of it is, is that
he felt that
the show had started to cross a
line, and
that it was actually becoming a
source of
embarrassment. And so walking
away from $50
million was pretty heroic and
pretty decent
and full of integrity.
Well, you know, I couldn't read
until I was
12. And maybe I wasn't 12, but I
was older.
I think people start reading
when they're
5 or something. And so books
were kind of
this phantasmagorical space that
I couldn't
enter because my mom could read.
My dad was
an academic. Everyone was so
intelligent.
And I couldn't go there.
And the moment I could, I just
started to
read ravenously. One of the
books that I remember
changing everyone's lives was
"Beloved." That
was the first time people who
had been silenced,
enslaved people, became human.
And, at that moment, I said,
this is what
a writer can do. And, so, for
me, Toni Morrison
doesn't exist on a human plane.
She almost
exists in this odd, spiritual,
otherworld,
in terms of her work. And when
she won that
Nobel Prize, what was
interesting is that
a lot of prominent newspapers
asked, does
this woman deserve it?
So, when I had the moment to
take the "New
York Times" magazine cover, I
decided I'm
going to take that cover to lay
flowers at
the feet of this woman and say,
not only did
you deserve it, but thank you.
My name is Rachel Kaadzi
Ghansah, and this
is my Brief But Spectacular take
on fearlessness
and black art.
GWEN IFILL: You can see more
videos in our
Brief But Spectacular series on
our Facebook
page, Facebook.com/NewsHour.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Friday, Miles O'Brien reports
from Brazil,
at the center of the Zika
outbreak.
I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening
with Mark Shields and David
Brooks.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank
you, and good night.